test_Entrez
Test parsing database list returned by EInfo ... ok
Test parsing database info returned by EInfo ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch from the Journals database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch when no items were found ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch from the Nucleotide database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch from PubMed Central ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch from the Protein database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch from PubMed (first test) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch from PubMed (second test) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESearch from PubMed (third test) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EPost ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EPost with an invalid id (overflow tag) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EPost with incorrect arguments ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary from the Journals database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary from the Nucleotide database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary from the Protein database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary from PubMed ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary from the Structure database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary from the Taxonomy database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary from the UniSTS database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by ESummary with incorrect arguments ... ok
Test parsing cancerchromosomes links returned by ELink ... ok
Test parsing medline indexed articles returned by ELink ... ok
Test parsing Nucleotide to Protein links returned by ELink ... ok
Test parsing pubmed links returned by ELink (first test) ... ok
Test parsing pubmed links returned by ELink (second test) ... ok
Test parsing pubmed link returned by ELink (third test) ... ok
Test parsing pubmed links returned by ELink (fourth test) ... ok
Test parsing pubmed links returned by ELink (fifth test) ... ok
Test parsing pubmed links returned by ELink (sixth test) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EFetch, Journals database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EFetch, Nucleotide database (first test) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EFetch, Protein database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EFetch, OMIM database ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EFetch, PubMed database (first test) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EFetch, PubMed database (second test) ... ok
Test parsing XML returned by EFetch, Taxonomy database ... ok
Test parsing XML output returned by EGQuery (first test) ... ok
Test parsing XML output returned by EGQuery (second test) ... ok
Test parsing XML output returned by ESpell ... ok

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 40 tests in 0.228s

OK
